this video is made possible by
hellofresh
go to hellofresh.com and use code real
life lure 12 to get 12 free meals
including free shipping this is istanbul
it's the largest city in the world with
territory on two continents
europe and asia more than 15 million
people live here
which makes it the seventh largest city
in asia and the number one largest city
in europe
it's also one of the most famous and
well-known cities that humanity has ever
built it has served as the capital city
for three
great historical empires the romans the
byzantines and the ottomans
and it's been the largest city in the
world on two separate historical
occasions
during both the 7th and 17th centuries
today nearly 1 out of every 5 turks live
in istanbul the city accounts for over
half of all turkey's trade
and it has an economy larger than the
entirety of south africa
most of istanbul's power and influence
upon the world is rooted in the city's
geography
and excellent strategic location it's
positioned directly adjacent to this
the bosphorus straight a narrow water
passage that divides europe from asia
and connects the black sea with the
aegean and mediterranean
historically it's the only possible path
that bulgaria romania
ukraine georgia and the southwestern
part of russia can use to reach the
mediterranean
sea and the global world ocean from
there out of either the suez or
gibraltar
so obviously the bosphorus is absolutely
critical to all of these countries for
international trade
but especially to russia the world's
second largest exporter of oil who has
to ship nearly
all of it from their ports here on the
black sea that remain warm and ice-free
year-round
the bosphorus is basically the only way
for these large russian oil tankers to
get out into the world's oceans
but the strait is important to dozens of
other countries as well
because of this the danube this
is the second longest river in europe
and its mouth is located directly on the
black
sea the river flows for thousands of
kilometers directly through
important european cities like vienna
bratislava
budapest and belgrade and since 1992
it also connects directly to the rhine
river and the port of rotterdam
europe's largest commercial trading hub
cargo ships traveling between shanghai
the busiest port in asia and rotterdam
the busiest port in europe
will almost always travel through the
suez canal and will then
sometimes choose to pass through the
bosphorus into the danube across into
the rhine
and then up to rotterdam all of this
contributes to making the bosphorous
strait one of the busiest trade routes
in the entire world
with more than three times the
commercial traffic as the suez canal
sees
and it makes istanbul one of earth's
most strategic locations
but despite that turkey itself benefits
very little from this possession today
they literally make zero dollars from it
they can't allow
certain allied warships through it and
in order to fix all of that
turkey is planning on transforming
istanbul their biggest and most
important city
into an island and here's why
in 1923 after the first world war in the
turkish war of independence
the new turkish republic signed the
treaty of lausanne which demilitarized
the turkish straits and opened them up
to
unrestricted civilian maritime traffic
but by the 1930s with the rise of
fascist italy and her colonies directly
off of the turkish coast
the mediterranean's geopolitical
situation had changed dramatically
and turkey sought to alter the terms of
lausanne this
led directly to the montreal convention
of 1936
which enabled turkey to re-militarize
the straits in order to protect
themselves from italy
and it heavily restricted the ability of
non-black sea
adjacent powers from sending any
warships through
while it also guaranteed the free
passage of all civilian commercial ships
in times of both peace and war and
outlawed turkey from ever being able to
charge or collect any tolls or fees
at the time this was a great deal for
turkey
because it all but guaranteed their
neutrality during the second world war
and it was a boon for the soviet union
because it would end up preventing
any axis warships from being able to
enter into the black sea for the
entirety of the second world war
but over the decades since world war ii
ended numerous controversies have been
raised over the treaty's status
immediately after the war ended the
soviets demanded
joint control with turkey over the
bosphorus
and a permanent soviet military presence
there
turkey rejected these demands but the
soviets got clever
the montreal convention established that
no more than
nine foreign warships with a total
aggregate tonnage of 15 000 tons may
pass through the bosphorus at any one
single time
so to cheese the system a bit the
soviets would simply keep one of their
own larger warships
inside of the bosphorus at all times
that would almost
always maximize the 15 000 tons of
foreign warships allowed inside of the
bosphorus
in effect this prevented any other
powers besides turkey
from ever being able to pass any
warships through
so turkey knew that they couldn't resist
the soviet union's pressure alone and so
in 1952 they decided to join nato
which only further provoked the soviet's
reaction towards the strait
now being effectively in the hands of
their cold war adversaries
but the united states hasn't been very
happy with the arrangement either
non-black sea nations warships are
severely restricted with ever being able
to use the bosphorus
including the united states ships with
gun calibers larger than 8 inches are on
the ban list
so to get around it in the 1960s the
united states
sent missile cruisers through the
soviets of course protested this
but turkey argued successfully that the
missiles aboard the u.s
ships weren't in fact actually guns
and that since such weapons didn't exist
back in 1936 when the treaty was signed
they were not part of the restrictions
however the convention
is still a hindrance to u.s military
buildup in the black sea
i mean the u.s navy is literally
everywhere and they'd like to go for the
completion achievement in the black sea
too but montreal limits their ability to
send any significant
large ships through the bosphorus like
say aircraft carriers and submarines
in 1994 the united nations convention on
the law of the sea
or unclose came into force that largely
defines the rights and responsibilities
of nations out on the world's oceans
nearly every country in the world has
signed on to this agreement except for
notably
turkey and the united states even though
the treaty would place the bosphorous
straight within turkish territorial
waters
and theoretically overrule the montreal
convention
and give turkey greater autonomy over
administrating it
they have always refused to sign it
because doing so
would also surrender nearly the entire
aegean sea
to greece's territorial waters while the
u.s largely refuses to sign because it
would place the critical northwest
passage within canadian territorial
waters
rather than international waters so the
turks are therefore legally still stuck
with the clunky and dated terms
of the 1936 montreal convention that
restricts their ability to make any
money
and restricts u.s warships from being
able to access the black sea
america and turkey's interests are
therefore both directly aligned
with subverting both unclose and
montreau
so in order to get around both of them
and have their cake
and eat it too turkey could
theoretically just
build an artificial canal directly
adjacent to the natural bosphorus strait
this is because technically the
restrictive terms of the montreal
convention
only apply to the bosphorous strait
itself
or so argues turkey by building an
artificial canal directly next to the
bosphorus and transforming istanbul
itself into an island
turkey argues that it could begin
charging tolls there
and finally begin allowing us and nato
aircraft carriers and submarines
into the black sea for the first time
and this
is all exactly what turkey is planning
on doing
with their istanbul canal megaproject
which just began construction
a few months ago back in march of 2021
the plan currently is to construct the
canal 30 kilometers to the west of the
bosphorus on the european side of turkey
and make it 45 kilometers long from end
to end
for comparison the suez canal is nearly
200 kilometers long
so from an engineering perspective the
boss first canal is totally doable
but turkey's stated reasons for
constructing the canal however
have nothing to do at all with bypassing
the montreal convention
as one of the world's busiest shipping
lanes the boss first strait is almost
always massively congested with traffic
over 41 000 ships will pass through the
narrow strait
every year and when arriving ships
usually have to join a queue and wait an
average of 14
hours just to pass through and sometimes
they have to wait for days when it's
especially busy
hundreds of ships will literally just be
sitting outside of the strait at a time
waiting for their turn to pass through
and that's all without some idiot
getting their ship stuck inside
building a canal adjacent to the
bosphorus would immediately help
alleviate a lot of this traffic and
turkey claims that it will be capable of
supporting up to 160 ships crossing per
day about the same number of transits
that are currently just passing through
the bosphorus
it would also help divert a lot of the
dangerous cargo passing through the
bosphorus right next door to the
istanbul city center
15 million people live nearby the shores
of the bosphorus
and as has been seen by incidents like
the beirut explosion or the halifax
explosion from the past
dangerous cargo like munitions oil or
fertilizer pose a severe risk of
explosion during a collision event
such an incident taking place in the
bosphorus isn't entirely unlikely given
the huge amount of oil and
natural gas that russia ships through it
not to mention
russian and turkish warships submarines
the huge number of transits per day
the busy ferry traffic that criss
crosses between istanbul's two sides
and the difficult to navigate waters and
most of these factors weren't even
present in places like beirut or halifax
and
those still happened so probably better
to divert all of that dangerous cargo
west along a new canal away from the
city center anyway
the only problem to that line of
argument is that turkey also wants to
extensively develop the banks of the new
canal
with brand new real estate the entire
canal project is a part of turkey's
vision
2023 plan and once hopefully finished by
then
will mark the centennial anniversary of
the modern turkish republic's existence
the canal will link up with the newly
constructed istanbul airport which
when fully completed in the middle of
the 2020s will be the largest airport in
the world
capable of accommodating 200 million
passengers a year
turkey expects that the canal's
construction will cost approximately 15
billion dollars and it's monstrously
controversial
on the plus side the turkish government
expects that the canal will alleviate
congestion in the bosphorus strait
speed up international trade divert
dangerous cargo from istanbul city
center open up more developed real
estate
and provide a way to finally monetize
their geostrategic location with tolls
and fees that could be as high according
to them
as eight billion dollars a year which
would be 30 percent
higher revenue than the suez canal
generates for egypt
but critics believe that well pretty
much none of that is actually going to
happen
first of all constructing the canal is
only going to serve a means for turkey
to
bypass the montreal convention not
overturn
it merchant ships are still going to be
guaranteed free and
unrestricted access to the bosphorous
even after the canal is built
so many people pretty rightfully wonder
how turkey will convince people
to actually use it turkey argues that
the canal will basically serve as a
quicker express lane that ships can move
through to avoid the long wait times
that are seen at the bosphorus
and they plan to make the bus first wait
times even worse to encourage the
canal's use a little more
the montreal convention grants turkey
the authority to screen
all ships passing through the bosphorus
for sanitary
and environmental safety so
theoretically
turkey could and probably would expand
on this authority
to make very very long sanitary and or
environmental checks on all ships
passing through the bosphorus but offer
no such checks through their canal that
people are actually paying to use
still though it's feared by many that a
lot of ships just aren't going to care
and will choose to continue using the
bosphorus for free even if the wait
times are a bit longer
it's sort of like how people feel about
using youtube premium but that's neither
here nor there
anyway the canal itself will also
necessitate the displacement of
thousands of residents who currently
live within its direct path
it'll probably do untold environmental
damage by contaminating istanbul's
groundwater
destroy a major reservoir that provides
for one-fifth of istanbul's already
strained drinking water supply
and more interestingly some of the
property along the canal's planned route
is already owned by members of the
qatari royal family
and by this guy barat al-baryak the
turkish minister of finance
and the son-in-law of president erdogan
himself meaning that he would personally
benefit from the canal's resulting real
estate development
and even further china has ambitions
with serbia and greece to potentially
construct their own canal from the
aegean directly into the danube river
which if built would provide a way for
ships to completely circumvent the
entire bosphorus anyway
by moving between the aegean danube and
black sea i've previously made an entire
video about this project and
if turkey charges too much for their
canal china might just end up building
their own with the help of serbia and
greece in order to get around it
as a result of all of these factors the
istanbul canal
is heavily opposed within istanbul
itself with one poll suggesting that a
full 80 percent of istanbul citizens are
opposed to its construction
and a mere eight percent supporting it
but the canal
is also heavily opposed by many outside
powers
most notably and obviously russia turkey
and by extension nato and the united
states
argue that the montreal convention will
not apply to the new istanbul canal
and that could theoretically enable
massive u.s ships
aircraft carriers and submarines into
the black sea for the very first time
right on russia's doorstep near critical
locations such as crimea
ukraine and the donbass region where
russia is actively fighting a war
naturally russia rather enjoys the
current status quo then enables their
warships to come and go as they please
while restricting their enemies
movements so they argue that the montro
convention
would still apply to the istanbul canal
and that would also mean that legally
turkey wouldn't be able to charge any
fees or collect any revenue
for their 15 billion canal investment
so if the canal ends up being built it
will probably
massively strain relations between
russia and turkey
and also as a bonus probably jeopardize
russia's monopoly of power in the black
sea
near their critical ambitions in ukraine
because of all these potential foreign
consequences
104 former turkish admirals and naval
officers signed an open letter
expressing their objection to the
canal's construction
citing that the montreal convention
guaranteed turkish neutrality during
times of war
and prevented conflict from ever
breaking out in the black sea
between the united states and russia and
that bypassing it could open turkey and
the black sea
up to future conflict but the very next
day
10 of these admirals were arrested and
jailed by the turkish government
effectively quashing all of their
resistance
president erdogan and the turkish
government are fully committed to
completing the istanbul canal by 2023
which will change istanbul's turkeys and
the world's geography
and reality forever the boss first
strait
is vitally important for several
industries and resources
but perhaps none are as important as
wheat
russia and ukraine are the world's
largest and fifth largest exporters of
wheat respectively and together
they export more wheat than the entire
north american continent does combined
the middle east alone absorbs more than
80 percent
of these massive eastern european wheat
exports
which means that the vital flow of food
to the middle east and money to russia
and ukraine
inevitably all flows directly through
the bus for a straight and
any disruption in that supply chain can
prove to have catastrophic consequences
like it did in 2010 that year russia and
ukraine experienced a once in a
century drought event that crippled
their wheat production and
in a bid to protect her own domestic
wheat farmers
russia temporarily banned all of her
weed exports
eighty percent of the middle east's
wheat imports were suddenly and
immediately cut off leading to
widespread food shortages which
in part contributed to the arab spring
event that year
that led to revolution and civil wars
across the arab world
any disruption in the bosphorus could
hypothetically lead to
similar events taking place which is why
this tiny straight
is so important to so many people
outside of turkey at the end of the day
everybody needs food and ideally you
need to eat good food too
i used to eat nothing but takeout
because i didn't have any time to go
shopping and prep and make meals
so delivery was always the quick and
easy alternative
the problem is though takeout isn't
healthy and it isn't cheap either
so eventually i wanted to find a
healthier cheaper and similarly
convenient alternative
and that's why i started to use
hellofresh seriously
i've been having meals delivered to my
front door by hella fresh now for over a
year
and i've got dozens of recipes that i've
collected from them
it's so convenient because every week a
new box arrives with everything i need
in the exact quantities i need to make
all of these different
delicious unique meals it completely
eliminates having to go visit the
grocery
store and it makes prep time so much
faster
so i can get a meal like this bulgogi
pork tenderloin made in only 30 minutes
hellofresh also dramatically cuts down
on food waste by sending you the exact
quantity of ingredients you need
and overall the carbon footprint from
one of their meals is
25 percent lower than one made from
store-bought groceries
you can find out why i've been using
hellofresh consistently for over a year
now
when you go to hellofresh.com and use
the code reallifelore12
to get 12 completely free meals
including free shipping and even better
you'll also really help support real
life lore while you're at it
enjoying your free meals thanks for
watching